Version 2: Add Multi-Perspective Domain and CAA Checking Requirements to the BRs (#8)
ryancdickson/staging: docs/BR.md

Reviewer: Given how extensively this ballot overhauls Section 3.2.2.8, I think this would also be a convenient time to address https://github.com/cabforum/servercert/issues/466, by pulling CAA-relevant language out of Section 2.2 and into 3.2.2.8.

Author: Accidentally split across two commits -- https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8/commits/0525044a051bad888caf1072111a8c5717fe1cfa and https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/8315b6a3a338ea6b47cf99979b0d97f61e5f3363.

What do you think @aarongable?

Reviewer: LGTM.

**Legal Entity**: An association, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, trust, government entity or other entity with legal standing in a country's legal system.

> **Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration**: A process by which the determinations made during domain validation and CAA checking by the Primary Network Perspective are corroborated from other Network Perspectives before Subscriber Certificate issuance. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration**: A process by which the determinations made during domain validation and CAA checking by the Primary Network Perspective are corroborated from other Network Perspectives before Certificate issuance. 
```

Domain validation is performed prior to the inclusion of dNSNames in the permittedSubtrees of technically constrained CA certificates. Unless this was previously discussed, I think it's appropriate to also require MPIC for such validations.

Reviewer 3: That's a good point. As far as I know no one has previously discussed this, so I think this change makes sense.

Author: +1, good observation @CBonnell. 

Committing suggestion + resolving comment.

**P-Label**: A XN-Label that contains valid output of the Punycode algorithm (as defined in RFC 3492, Section 6.3) from the fifth and subsequent positions.

> **Primary CAA Determination**: The basis for which the CA has checked CAA records and determined its authority to issue a Certificate for the requested domain(s).
> 
> **Primary Domain Validation Determination**: The basis for which the CA has determined Applicant authority and/or domain authorization or control using one of the methods described in Section 3.2.2.4 of this Policy.

Reviewer 4: Reading the changes further down it looks like the intention of these definitions is to indicate the primary network perspective (the CA network)?

I got confused if this was intended to the 'primary domain' as in the 'naked' domain (i.e., example.com vs sub.example.com).

I tried to clarify this with the following suggestion, but potentially there is also a different definition we could use?
```suggestion
**Primary CAA Determination**: The primary perspective of which the CA has checked CAA records and determined its authority to issue a Certificate for the requested domain(s).

**Primary Domain Validation Determination**: The primary perspective of which the CA has determined Applicant authority and/or domain authorization or control using one of the methods described in Section 3.2.2.4 of this Policy.
```

Reviewer 3: The intention was for these to refer to the primary perspective. I think the change looks good.

Author: Good point @vanbroup - I think these definitions have evolved over the course of requirements drafting and should be updated. Originally, these terms were intended to be broader than just "where" (i.e., the network perspective), but to also consider the outcome (i.e., determination made from that perspective re: validation was completed successfully and CAA records indicated the CA could proceed with issuance).

Given the current state of 3.2.2.9, I think there's an opportunity to simplify and collapse these terms into something like "Primary Network Perspective." 

I'll refactor this shortly.

Author: Updated in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/e013f27c16be097217c37fe0922cff201bc54641

**P-Label**: A XN-Label that contains valid output of the Punycode algorithm (as defined in RFC 3492, Section 6.3) from the fifth and subsequent positions.

> **Primary Network Perspective**: The Network Perspective used by the CA to determine 1) its authority to issue a Certificate for the requested domain(s) or IP address(es) and 2) the Applicant's authority and/or domain authorization or control of the requested domain(s) or IP address(es). 

Reviewer 5: So, I'm not sure that this does a great job of capturing what a Primary Network Perspective is, particularly when compared to other, non-primary Network Perspectives.  My understanding is that all Network Perspectives are used by CAs to determine if they should issue for domain(s) and/or IP address(es).  My understanding is that the Primary network perspective is distinct by the fact that it must pass and it is the Chief perspective that ultimately looks at its result and the results from the other Network Perspectives and then makes the decision to yay or nay issuance.

Here's my attempt at some alternative text, I don't think it's perfect because ultimately the PNP might not be the decision maker, it could be a bit of code running alongside the PNP authority checking code.  But I thought I could get the conversation moving towards some better language that perhaps makes it clearer as to what a PNP is.
```suggestion
**Primary Network Perspective**: The Network Perspective used by the CA to make the determination of 1) the CA's authority to issue a Certificate for the requested domain(s) or IP address(es) and 2) the Applicant's authority and/or domain authorization or control of the requested domain(s) or IP address(es). 
```

Author: No issues with this recommendation (and, I attempted to further clarify that the primary must be distinct from those used for corroboration in [this](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/46f6059bcee06384e4600c66aa05745a9fe7a3d4) recent update).

> **Primary Network Perspective**: The Network Perspective used by the CA to make the determination of 1) the CA's authority to issue a Certificate for the requested domain(s) or IP address(es) and 2) the Applicant's authority and/or domain authorization or control of the requested domain(s) or IP address(es). 

Reviewer 6: I wonder what should be considered the primary perspective, if there are any limitations at all. 

It seems intuitive that the primary perspective is the "main" or "existing" network from which the determinations are being made. However, from a continuity perspective I can imagine there are circumstances where one of the network perspectives could be promoted to the primary, so maybe we want to add flexibility?

Reviewer 3: I always thought of the primary perspective as the perspective that is audited and compliant with netsec requirements.

I think flexibility in allowing other perspectives to be promoted to primary (presuming these perspectives are audited and meet all existing netsec requirements) would be good. @chrisbn do you feel the current draft does not allow this flexibility and is there any language you would recommend adding to make this explicit?

Reviewer 6: I think conceptually any of the network perspectives should be able to act as the primary perspective. It depends on the interpretation of "audited and meeting netsec requirements", if those the items in the "SHOULD" section, I think there's proper flexibility and the interpretation I would support. If the intent is to expect a full netsec audit for the primary node, that's another interpretation.

Reviewer 3: In general I support flexibility in the selection of perspectives and designation of a primary perspective. However, I think it is very important to maintain this distinction between the primary and the additional perspectives, and require a netsec audit on the primary perspective. To significantly reduce the implementation burden, this draft does not require additional perspectives to be audited and comply with netsec (beyond the baseline security expectations contained in this section). If done improperly, this could undermine the security protections established by the netsec requirements as an adversary could target these additional perspectives and use them to fraudulently validate domain control.

To avoid this, the primary perspective MUST be netsec audited and properly complete domain control validation. In today's BRs, this is sufficient domain control validation to sign a certificate. From there, multi-perspective checking can block a signature in the event of a BGP attack, but the additional, non-audited perspectives have no way of overriding a domain-control-validation request that has not been successfully completed by the primary perspective. This ensures that none of the procedures added in this document degrade the existing security of the PKI.

Thus, I feel my interpretation would be that the "primary perspective" must have a full netsec audit as this is the perspective that must succeed for issuance. If a CA has multiple fully audited perspectives, I think it is fine to use them on the same request and the primary perspective can be chosen from the audited perspectives (although preferably before the request is sent and not after the CA observes the domain control validation results).

Author: Marking this thread as resolved, as discussion carries into https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8#discussion_r1370359911. Comment was addressed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8#discussion_r1372196235 and a minor clarifying update was described in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8#discussion_r1374523955.

  i. 30 days or
  ii. if the Applicant submitted the Certificate request, the time frame permitted for reuse of validated information relevant to the Certificate (such as in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions) of these Guidelines or Section 11.14.3 of the EV Guidelines).

CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:
- the same challenge information (i.e. Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Network Perspective; and

> - evidence confirming the CA's authority to issue as determined by the Primary Network Perspective, as specified in Section 3.2.2.8. 

Reviewer 2: (this comment is applicable to all modified DCV methods)

I find this reference to the CAA requirements as defined in 3.2.2.8 rather confusing. In many cases, the validation of a single Authorization Domain Name is used for the validation of potentially many domains. For example, a single successful validation of  "example.com" via method 7 would be sufficient to demonstrate control of many subdomains under "example.com", some (or all) of which could be in different zones from "example.com" itself. However, 3.2.2.8 prescribes that the CA perform the CAA algorithm for all SANs to be included in the certificate regardless of how they were validated.

By tying the CAA MPIC requirement with the DCV requirement, it becomes unclear which domain names must be checked for MPIC when performing the CAA checks under 3.2.2.8. To ensure clarity on the requirements, I recommend modifying 3.2.2.8 to define the MPIC obligations specifically for CAA there.

Author: 3.2.2.9 (the new MPIC section) includes...

> Each corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently verify: 
a. the presence of the expected 1) Random Value, 2) Request Token, 3) IP Address, or 4) Contact Address, as required by the relied upon validation method specified in Sections 3.2.2.4 and 3.2.2.5; and
**b. the CA's authority to issue to the requested domain(s), as specified in Section 3.2.2.8.**

Given the bolded language above, it seems like we could remove the CAA references added in the 3.2.2.4.X subsections (e.g., "_evidence confirming the CA's authority to issue as determined by the Primary Network Perspective, as specified in Section 3.2.2.8._")?

Would that address your concern?

Reviewer 2: I think there needs to be, at a minimum, a reference to section 3.2.2.9 in section 3.2.2.8. This reference would serve as an indicator to readers that they must also read 3.2.2.9 to correctly implement CAA checking.

Author: Added [this](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/43cc1c21c9f3c0e88c449425151439bc2c576794#diff-e0ac1bd190515a4f2ec09139d395ef6a8c7e9e5b612957c1f5a2dea80c6a6cfeR1026) update to address the above concern.  What do you think?

Beyond the above change, this commit removes the CAA references added in 3.2.2.4.x as they relate to MPIC - and also adds MPIC being in scope of 3.2.2.4.16 (Phone Contact with DNS TXT Record Phone Contact), which the work team [identified](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Vg8qwH_slheGofmj-lKt0P-bMNezlML3n89g8dSVSGo/edit#bookmark=id.c06w13peqyg9) was in-scope of this effort.

Reviewer 3: I think its worth having a more general discussion of this as well as a more detailed review of the language in the draft. Our group at Princeton feels that including some form of multi-perspective checking for CAA records is quite important. CAA records establish a CA's permission to issue and issuing in violation of a CAA record is a serious security breach.

However, we are aware there are some nuances regarding the implementation of CAA record checking in comparison to DV. Particularly, because CAA record checks must be done for all subdomains and have a shorter validity than a domain control validation check, CAA record checks may have to be done at issuance time for a domain that has already been validated. While it is clearly a stronger security stance and arguably a simpler standard to use multiple perspectives for all CAA checks, we felt it might meaningfully reduce the implementation burden to only perform MP-CAA checks at validation time (this is the current deployment at Let's Encrypt and I would be curious to also hear how Google Trust Services handles this case). Domain Validation contains more high-latency steps which depend on external systems than issuance does. To me this seems to facilitate an easier implementation.

As several have commented in the GitHub, only checking CAA records at validation time potentially raises several issues.

The first issue is the validity duration of a CAA check which is shorter than that of issuance. If MPCAA checking is only done at validation time, then this check would have to have validity equal to that of domain control validation to avoid a recheck at issuance time. Personally I think only performing a primary perspective CAA recheck at issuance time does not significantly change the security of the system. Potentially it allow an adversary to use a BGP attack to expand the time window after a malicious validation during which the adversary can request a certificate. However, this phenomena exists even with the shorter CAA checking window and other factors like DNS caching can cause this type of behavior even if checks were done more frequently. Personally I think this alone does not do much to justify rechecks at issuance time.

The second complication is that some validation methods can be used to validate arbitrary subdomains (while a CAA check must be done on each subdomain requested). This is a concern Dimitris brought up in the CAB Forum public list: https://lists.cabforum.org/pipermail/validation/2023-June/001904.html . In order to avoid all issuance time MPCAA checks, an MPCAA check would have to cover all subdomains. This is contrary to the CAA RFC that gives the CAA record of subdomains priority over parent domains. The vulnerability presented here is that an adversary can potentially downgrade the CAA record of a subdomain to that of its parent domain using an equally-specific BGP attack. This is clearly not ideal, but I still think that this is vastly preferable to dropping MPCAA record checking entirely. Also, in this scenario the adversary would be authorized to get a certificate for the parent domain (because it had completed domain control validation for that domain and the parent domain had a CAA record that permitted issuance) so this is largely about developing protections for a subdomain of a domain that an adversary has already compromised.

The final complication regards certificate types (i.e., wildcard vs standard) given that the interpretation of CAA records (particularly record sets with the issuewild tag) depends on the type of certificate a CA is signing (whereas some forms of domain validation can be used for either one). Potentially a CA may have checked a CAA record at validation time and been permitted to issue a standard, non-widlcard, certificate for that domain. At a later time a subscriber may request a wildcard certificate for the same domain. In some implementations this may require rechecking the CAA record to confirm that the CA is compliant with any issuewild tags. Personally I think there is potentially technical answer to this complication which is to store information about whether a CA can issue standard or wildcard certificate based on an initial CAA query (even if a subscriber is only requesting a standard certificate). One factor that facilitates this is that the same DNS query which is used to request the initial CAA record will both issuewild and issue tags. Storing this extra info would only require one additional bit of information on the result of an MPCAA lookup and would eliminate the need to perform additional MPCAA lookups at issuance time due to this reason.

Given all of these points and @CBonnell  's point about detaching the CAA checking requirement from the DV requirement, an idea that comes to mind is to add additional exceptions for the CAA checking requirement in 3.2.2.9:
Line 1054 could be modified to read:
[Section 3.2.2.4](#3224-validation-of-domain-authorization-or-control) and [Section 3.2.2.5](#3225-authentication-for-an-ip-address) describe the validation methods that require the use of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration and how a Network Perspective can corroborate the outcomes determined by the Primary Network Perspective. A CA MAY use corroborating evidence for CAA record compliance for a period of 398 days. If an applicant has completed domain control validation for a domain and a CA has collected corroborating evidence that gives the CA permission to issue a certificate for that domain as defined in Section 3.2.2.8 and 3.2.2.9, the CA does not need to corroborate the CAA determination of any subdomains for certificate requests from the same applicant.

Author: @CBonnell - Any opinion on @birgelee's suggestion above?

"_[Section 3.2.2.4](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8#3224-validation-of-domain-authorization-or-control) and [Section 3.2.2.5](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8#3225-authentication-for-an-ip-address) describe the validation methods that require the use of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration and how a Network Perspective can corroborate the outcomes determined by the Primary Network Perspective. A CA MAY use corroborating evidence for CAA record compliance for a period of 398 days. If an applicant has completed domain control validation for a domain and a CA has collected corroborating evidence that gives the CA permission to issue a certificate for that domain as defined in Section 3.2.2.8 and 3.2.2.9, the CA does not need to corroborate the CAA determination of any subdomains for certificate requests from the same applicant._"

  i. 30 days or
  ii. if the Applicant submitted the Certificate request, the time frame permitted for reuse of validated information relevant to the Certificate (such as in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions) of these Guidelines or Section 11.14.3 of the EV Guidelines).

CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:

> - the same challenge information (e.g., Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and

Reviewer: Because Random Value and Request Token are the only two acceptable items to find, this can be an "in other words" rather than a "for example":
```suggestion
- the same challenge information (i.e. Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and
```

1. The CA MUST provide a Random Value unique to the certificate request.
2. The Random Value MUST remain valid for use in a confirming response for no more than 30 days from its creation. The CPS MAY specify a shorter validity period for Random Values, in which case the CA MUST follow its CPS.

CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:

> - the same challenge information (e.g., Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the same challenge information (i.e. Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and
```

2. Redirects MUST be to resource URLs with either the "http" or "https" scheme.
3. Redirects MUST be to resource URLs accessed via Authorized Ports.

CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:

> - the same challenge information (e.g., Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the same challenge information (i.e. Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and
```

  i. 30 days or
  ii. if the Applicant submitted the certificate request, the time frame permitted for reuse of validated information relevant to the certificate (such as in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions) of this document).

> CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same challenge information (i.e. Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Network Perspective.
```

> - the same challenge information (i.e. Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Network Perspective; and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - evidence confirming the CA's authority to issue as determined by the Primary Network Perspective, as specified in Section 3.2.2.8. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

CAA for IP addresses is not a thing yet (see https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-chariton-ipcaa/ for a recent effort to define such a mechanism), so I suggested striking any reference to 3.2.2.8 in 3.2.2.5.

Reviewer 3: I think some of the language may have been copied over by accident. I agree it makes sense to strike any reference to 3.2.2.8 here.

Author: Bad copy and pasting on my part! Thanks for catching, @CBonnell.

  i. 30 days or
  ii. if the Applicant submitted the certificate request, the time frame permitted for reuse of validated information relevant to the certificate (such as in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions) of this document).

CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:

> - the same challenge information (e.g., Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the same challenge information (i.e. Random Value or Request Token) as the Primary Domain Validation Determination; and
```

The Random Value SHALL remain valid for use in a confirming response for no more than 30 days from its creation. The CPS MAY specify a shorter validity period for Random Values, in which case the CA MUST follow its CPS.

> CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in [Section 3.2.2.9](#3229-multi-perspective-issuance-corroboration). To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same IP Address Contact as the Primary Network Perspective.

Reviewer 7: I think this triggers MPI on wrong challenge methods for IP addresses?
not sure how one can check RIR documents multiperspectively
think this like is for 3.2.2.5.3  because that's reverse DNS lookup, where multiple perspective make sense.

Reviewer 3: Thank you for bringing this up. I agree that putting multi perspective checking in 3.2.2.5.3 makes sens, and it does not make sense here.

To clarify, a potential fix for this would be to remove this paragraph (line 965) that you commented and put something along these lines at the end of 3.2.2.5.3:

```
CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in [Section 3.2.2.9](#3229-multi-perspective-issuance-corroboration). To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same token as the FQDN as the Primary Network Perspective.
```

Reviewer 7: 3.2.2.5 is looking for domain by rDNS and do verification for that domain be used for that IP address, so matching thing MP need to see be domain name there

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I had made a typo in that line recommendation for 3.2.2.5. I meant to delete token and have it read:

```
CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in [Section 3.2.2.9](#3229-multi-perspective-issuance-corroboration). To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same FQDN as the Primary Network Perspective.
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/8f35b320fc38cfd16a768d7e18fe73d1fcd92fea

The Random Value SHALL remain valid for use in a confirming response for no more than 30 days from its creation. The CPS MAY specify a shorter validity period for Random Values, in which case the CA MUST follow its CPS.

> CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same Domain Name as the Primary Network Perspective.
```

> - the same Domain Name as the Primary Network Perspective; and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - evidence confirming the CA's authority to issue as determined by the Primary Network Perspective, as specified in Section 3.2.2.8. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The Random Value SHALL remain valid for use in a confirming response for no more than 30 days from its creation. The CPS MAY specify a shorter validity period for Random Values.

##### 3.2.2.5.6 ACME "http-01" method for IP Addresses

Confirming the Applicant's control over the IP Address by performing the procedure documented for an "http-01" challenge in draft 04 of "ACME IP Identifier Validation Extension," available at <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-acme-ip-04#section-4>.

CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:
- the same token as the Primary Network Perspective; and

> - evidence confirming the CA's authority to issue as determined by the Primary Network Perspective, as specified in Section 3.2.2.8. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

##### 3.2.2.5.7 ACME "tls-alpn-01" method for IP Addresses

Confirming the Applicant's control over the IP Address by performing the procedure documented for a "tls-alpn-01" challenge in draft 04 of "ACME IP Identifier Validation Extension," available at <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-acme-ip-04#section-4>.

> CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CAs using this method MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as specified in Section 3.2.2.9. To count as corroborating, a Network Perspective MUST observe the same token as the Primary Network Perspective.
```

> - the same token as the Primary Network Perspective; and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - evidence confirming the CA's authority to issue as determined by the Primary Network Perspective, as specified in Section 3.2.2.8. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The Random Value SHALL remain valid for use in a confirming response for no more than 30 days from its creation. The CPS MAY specify a shorter validity period for Random Values.

##### 3.2.2.5.6 ACME "http-01" method for IP Addresses

> Confirming the Applicant's control over the IP Address by performing the procedure documented for an "http-01" challenge in draft 04 of "ACME IP Identifier Validation Extension," available at <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-acme-ip-04#section-4>.

Reviewer: (Unrelated) Hmm, this (and tls-alpn-01 below) should be updated to point at the actual RFC, not draft-04, at some point...

Author: Also suggested [here](https://github.com/cabforum/servercert/issues/169) and [here](https://github.com/cabforum/servercert/issues/446). 

This update is planned for inclusion in the upcoming clean-up ballot (led by @barrini).

CAs MUST document potential issuances that were prevented by a CAA record in sufficient detail to provide feedback to the CAB Forum on the circumstances, and SHOULD dispatch reports of such issuance requests to the contact(s) stipulated in the CAA iodef record(s), if present. CAs are not expected to support URL schemes in the iodef record other than mailto: or https:.

#### 3.2.2.9 Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration

Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the determinations (i.e., domain validation pass/fail, CAA permission/prohibition) made by the Primary Network Perspective from multiple additional Network Perspectives before Certificate issuance. This process can improve protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.

> The response returned from each corroborating Network Perspective MUST allow the CA to verify:

Reviewer 7: Is it right to consider that CA can't tell remote perspective the token it expected for a validation? from wording of I think it isn't allowed: because hacked remote perspective just repeat token it asked and reply "Yes I saw that token %s you requested there" so reply need to be "I saw "%s" from location %s you request" and actual validity check need to be done on the other side (CA). Am I right? and I'm not sure how to guard CAA from it: do I need to return entire DNSKEY there so it didn't craft there response up?

Reviewer 3: I do not think this language should be interpreted that strictly. While this type of behavior (where the remote perspective must prove knowledge of the validation token's value without communication from the primary perspective) potentially offers some security against compromised or misbehaving remote perspectives, I do not think it adds much substantial security, and I feel it adds some unneeded complexity.

On the security side, I largely see attacks where the remote perspectives misbehave (i.e., due to compromise or misconfiguration) outside of the threat model used in this ballot draft. There are currently no other ways for the primary perspective to verify the behavior of the remote perspectives (although the logic running at the primary perspective must enforce that responses from remote perspectives cannot turn a do-not-issue decision into an issue decision).

Furthermore, I do not think not communicating the token to remote perspectives provides a significant security improvement. The adversary in the threat model of this ballot is already aware of the required token that needs to be seen by the remote perspectives. Specifically, if an adversary compromised a remote perspective R and the primary perspective asked "what token did you see for this domain?," it would be trivial for the adversary to craft a response from R claiming it saw the proper token given that this is the very token the adversary was supposed to upload to the victim's webpage. Given the value of the token is already known by the adversary, I don't think there is much security improvement between asking remote perspectives "what token did you see for this domain?" vs "did you see token %s for this domain?" While I do think checking the validity of the token by the primary provides a sanity check that remote perspectives are doing their job, I do not think this check is robust in the case of a compromised remote perspective. @orangepizza you also have a good point about there not being an elegant parallel in the CAA space.

Maybe removing "allow the CA" and "The response returned" could make this language more general:

```suggestion
Each corroborating Network Perspective MUST verify:
```

Author: If I recall correctly, the intent of the existing language was in response to an earlier comment.

The basis for that comment was such that the perspectives should not be obligated to determine whether or not they corroborate the primary (as this would obligate the CA to share the expected token with the perspectives), but instead, perspectives should only be responsible for collecting information and sharing it with the CA. Ultimately, it should be the CA's responsibility to determine whether a perspective corroborates the primary validation. 

I think the text should accommodate either implementation approach:
1. The CA asks whether the perspective saw $challenge and the perspective responds accordingly ("Did you see '1235ABC1235'"? ---> "Yes.")
2. The CA asks the perspective to return the results of the lookup ("What did you see?"  ---> "I saw '12345ABC12345'")

@orangepizza / @birgelee - I'll see if I can improve this language further given the above discussion and the original comment.

Reviewer 7: `The response returned from each corroborating Network Perspective MUST allow the CA to verify, assume it replied truthfully`? if CA can trust NP's statement this problem doesn't happen. sentence feels weird though

Reviewer 7: Throwing something to wall if it sticks: (not a native speaker)
`Either by perspective itself or CA, each corroborating Network Perspective's observation MUST verify:`

Reviewer 3: I agree with @ryancdickson 's point that the text should accommodate either implementation. Just curious, if we changed it to simply:
`Each corroborating Network Perspective's observation MUST verify:`
would that clearly permit both interpretations?

Also just to reiterate, in the threat model for MPIC, the adversary is the one requesting a certificate for a domain it does not control and the challenge token is known to the adversary because it is the very token the CA sent to the adversary which was supposed to be uploaded to the domain. Thus, I do not think there is a major security advantage in not sharing tokens with remote perspectives and both of the implementations Ryan Dickson mentioned are good.

Author: @orangepizza / @birgelee --- thanks for the suggestions. 

What about:

"**_Each corroborating Network Perspective's response MUST provide the CA with the necessary information to allow it to affirmatively assess:_** 

- a. the presence of the expected 1) Random Value, 2) Request Token, 3) IP Address, or 4) Contact Address, as required by the relied upon validation method specified in Sections 3.2.2.4 and 3.2.2.5; and
- b. the CA's authority to issue to the requested domain(s), as specified in Section 3.2.2.8."

Author: Mocked up in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/278f3b84d991cb145f926f7caef5c211e05cf9a9.

Reviewer 3: To me this language looks good.

CAs MAY immediately retry Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration using the same validation method or an alternative method (e.g., a CA can immediately retry validation using "Email to DNS TXT Contact" if "Agreed-Upon Change to Website - ACME" does not corroborate the outcome of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration). When retrying Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration, CAs MUST NOT rely on corroborations from previous attempts. There is no stipulation regarding the maximum number of validation attempts that may be performed in any period of time.

The "Quorum Requirements" Table describes quorum requirements related to Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration. Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in is at least 500 km. Network Perspectives are considered "remote" when they are distinct from the Primary Network Perspective.

> Table: Quorum Requirements

Author: **Validation Subcommittee Comment (summarized):** The required number of remote perspectives needs to be clarified. 

**Response:** 

The "Quorum Requirements" table describes the maximum number of "non-corroborations" given the number of distinct remote network perspectives used for an MPIC attempt. The end of 3.2.2.9 presents the "Phased Implementation Timeline," which describes implementation milestones that strengthen over time. Over the proposed implementation timeline, quorum requirements increase from undefined (during the period where CAs SHOULD be implementing MPIC but are not otherwise required) to 5+ (beginning in December 2026).

I've tried summarizing the phasing below, with changes across phases highlighted in `code block` formatting.

------

#### Phase 1: June 15, 2024 - December 14, 2024 ("CAs SHOULD implement MPIC"):
- **MUST implement MPIC?** No ("SHOULD" not "MUST")
- **Required quorum?:** N/A (MPIC not required)
- **MUST block issuance if the quorum is not met:**  N/A (MPIC not required)
- **Geographic diversity requirements?:** N/A (MPIC not required)

------

#### Phase 2: December 15, 2024 - June 14, 2025 ("CAs MUST implement MPIC in monitoring mode*"):
- **MUST implement MPIC?** `Yes`
- **Required quorum?:** `Minimally, 2 remote perspectives must be used. If using less than 6 remote perspectives, 1 non-corroboration is allowed. If using 6 or more remote perspectives, 2 non-corroborations are allowed. `
- **MUST block issuance if the quorum is not met:**  `No.`
- **Geographic diversity requirements?:** `Perspectives must be 500km from 1) the primary perspective and 2) all other perspectives used in the quorum. `

\* **Note:** "Monitoring Mode" is a nickname for this period. As opposed to "blocking mode" (described in the next milestone), CAs may still issue a certificate if quorum requirements are not met during this period. This period was intended to offer flexibility to CA owners as they stood up this new capability (i.e., allows for fine tuning implementations). 

------

#### Phase 3: June 15, 2025 - December 14, 2025 ("CAs MUST implement MPIC in blocking mode*"):

- **MUST implement MPIC?** Yes
- **Required quorum?:** Minimally, 2 remote perspectives must be used. If using less than 6 remote perspectives, 1 non-corroboration is allowed. If using 6 or more remote perspectives, 2 non-corroborations are allowed. 
- **MUST block issuance if quorum is not met:**  `Yes.`
- **Geographic diversity requirements?:** Perspectives must be 500km from 1) the primary perspective and 2) all other perspectives used in the quorum. 

\* **Note**: "Blocking Mode" is a nickname. As opposed to "monitoring mode" (described in the last milestone), CAs MUST NOT issue a certificate if quorum requirements are not met from this point forward. 

------

#### Phase 4: December 15, 2025 - June 14, 2026 (requirements strengthen):
- **MUST implement MPIC?** Yes
- **Required quorum?:** Minimally, `3` remote perspectives must be used. If using less than 6 remote perspectives, 1 non-corroboration is allowed. If using 6 or more remote perspectives, 2 non-corroborations are allowed.  
- **MUST block issuance if the quorum is not met:** Yes.
- **Geographic diversity requirements?:** Perspectives must be 500km from 1) the primary perspective and 2) all other perspectives used in the quorum. `Additionally, corroborating perspectives must fall within the service regions of at least 2 distinct regional Internet registries.`

------

#### Phase 5: June 15, 2026 - December 14, 2026 (requirements strengthen):

- **MUST implement MPIC?** Yes
- **Required quorum?:** Minimally, `4` remote perspectives must be used. If using less than 6 remote perspectives, 1 non-corroboration is allowed.   If using 6 or more remote perspectives, 2 non-corroborations are allowed. 
- **MUST block issuance if the quorum is not met:** Yes.
- **Geographic diversity requirements?:** Perspectives must be 500km from 1) the primary perspective and 2) all other perspectives used in the quorum. Additionally, corroborating perspectives must fall within the service regions of at least 2 distinct regional Internet registries.

------

#### Phase 6: December 15, 2026 (requirements strengthen):
- **MUST implement MPIC?** Yes
- **Required quorum?:** Minimally, `5` remote perspectives must be used. If using less than 6 remote perspectives, 1 non-corroboration is allowed. If using 6 or more remote perspectives, 2 non-corroborations are allowed. 
- **MUST block issuance if the quorum is not met:** Yes.
- **Geographic diversity requirements?:** Perspectives must be 500km from 1) the primary perspective and 2) all other perspectives used in the quorum. Additionally, corroborating perspectives must fall within the service regions of at least 2 distinct regional Internet registries.

Reviewer 7: 1. if a remote perspective didn't replied back at all, (timeout/connection failed) would it considered it made non-corroboration reply or we don't consider it as used and not counted for quorum nor non-corroborations?
2. Is Primary Perspective counted for at least 2 RIR among corroborating perspectives requirement?

Reviewer 3: Based on past discussions, if a remote perspective is selected to be used but cannot be reached, I believe the intended interpretation is that it "does not corroborate." I feel this simplifies the requirement language by strictly keeping keeping the definition of corroborate as a binary (i.e., either does or does not corroborate with no intermediate state) and presents some robustness against an adversary that is willing to DoS a perspective in an effort to prevent that perspective from detecting its attack. There should be no barrier to a CA, after a filed MPIC attempt, immediately retrying MPIC with a different set of perspectives which can help for handling cases of benign perspectives going offline.

I believe in one of the past github threads there was a discussion about the primary perspective counting towards the 2 RIR count. From what I remember the consensus was that the Primary Perspective does not count and the additional perspectives must be spread over two RIRs. This helps prevent the case of the Primary Perspective being in one RIR and all additional perspectives being concentrated in another.

@orangepizza I am curious to know if you feel additional clarifying language should be added to the draft for these cases.

Reviewer 7: at least for multi-RIR requirement, because remote perspectives are corroborating with primary by definition: 
non-replying RIR was more a question about if dead perspective counted in X remote perspectives used, or counter need to call another to fill it's slot: an extreme example would be typo in list of remote perspective list made one point a nonexist server: would they passed as a non-corraboration, or it'll make entire process not satisfying MPV requirement?

Reviewer 3: Looking over the current language I actually feel the RIR requirement is pretty well clarified as being interpreted this way:
https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/blob/0144a4c0e544173d22a0f09fd4c45d4a52519992/docs/BR.md?plain=1#L1098C29-L1098C29

`
*Effective December 15, 2025*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration using at least three (3) remote Network Perspectives. The CA MUST NOT proceed with certificate issuance if the number of non-corroborations is greater than allowed in the Quorum Requirements table and if the remote Network Perspectives that do corroborate the determinations made by the Primary Network perspective do not fall within the service regions of at least two (2) distinct regional Internet registries.  
`

This seems to clearly state that the 2 RIR service region requirement is 1) only applied to remote Network Perspectives and 2) only applied to perspectives that do corroborate (i.e., non-corroborating perspectives do not count towards diversity).

With this in mind I feel that a dead perspective would count towards X remote perspectives used as long as the CA attempted to reach it, but would not count towards the corroboration count or the 2 distinct RIR requirement. Thus, whether the CA had to initiate a subsequent MPIC request and redial another perspective depends on whether the quorum and the diversity requirement can be satisfied without that perspective.

Is there a particular sentence you would recommend adding to this?

Reviewer 7: yes I just looked this summery and not that part of document: sorry for inconvenience

Reviewer 3: no worries. This part of the document recently changed and in past versions I feel this behavior was not as clearly specified

| # of Distinct Remote Network Perspectives Used | # of Allowed non-Corroborations |
| --- | --- |
| 2-5 |  1  |
| 6+  |  2  |

Network Perspectives performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration:

- MUST:

>     - Forward all Internet traffic via a network or set of networks that filter all RPKI-invalid BGP routes as defined by RFC 6811. 

Reviewer 6: The scope of this MUST requirement may require additional clarification to prevent ambiguity. For example, are "remote" network perspectives required to be RPKI filtered, or also the current "primary" network perspectives (which could be existing infrastructure) which might not be the intention and could have a big impact? In the latter case, as of when does it apply, as of the effective date of the ballot or as of the MPIC requirement date?

Reviewer 3: Great points. The intent was never to require the primary perspective to adopt RPKI filtering. This could require the selection of a new ISP, and some CAs may be in a region that is not well serviced by an RPKI-filtering ISP.

The intent is to require the deployment of new infrastructure (which is inherently remote giving CAs more liberty in selection of providers and locations) to be done using RPKI-filtering ISPs.

As for the effective date, I think this really only makes sense as a security improvement after June 15, 2025 at which point MPIC is actually capable of blocking issuance. I could see the argument of making the date earlier to push CAs to deploy infrastructure in RPKI-filtering ISPs from day one, but I personally feel making it as late as possible makes sense to give maximum time for implementation (also RPKI deployment continues to grow so there may be providers that are planning to deploy RPKI-filtering but are have not fully by the earlier date).

Here is a change that might clarify some of these points.

```
Network Perspectives performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration other than the Primary Network Perspective:

- By June 15, 2025 MUST :
    - Forward all Internet traffic via a network or set of networks that filter all RPKI-invalid BGP routes as defined by RFC 6811. 
```

Author: Sorry for the delayed response, @chrisbn and @birgelee.

In my opinion, nothing in the draft language prevents a CA owner from promoting a remote network perspective to act as the Primary Perspective. This proposal does not change expectations related to how domain validation takes place. If a CA owner were to promote a remote perspective to the role of a primary perspective, all requirements that exist for domain validation today apply. 

It also seems that delaying the adoption of filtering RPKI-invalid routes adds complexity and creates opportunity for misalignment with a well-defined future state with limited benefit. For example, this approach might necessitate re-work given it's beyond the CA owner's control as to whether an existing remote perspective's ISP adopts RPKI (or adopts it on a specific timeline).  Finally, and in my opinion, the value of the "monitoring mode" period (until June 15, 2025) is to most closely simulate the future state where enforcement (i.e., blocking) is required. This period is intended to allow CA owners to identify potential challenges and fine-tune implementations before they can block issuance. By failing to adopt the full set of future requirements, this period will not help the ecosystem realize its intended value proposition.

Reviewer 3: @ryancdickson I think that is a good point about ensuring monitoring mode performs as close to the enforcing deployment as possible. Would it make sense to move this date to be the start of monitoring mode?

I personally do like the date requirement being monitoring mode and not just the adoption time of this ballot. Google Trust Services and Let's Encrypt have systems that qualify as remote network perspectives and, even though there is no other normative requirement before the monitoring mode date, it seems to me that having no specified date on this line could potentially require them to immediately change their systems before adoption of this ballot. Having the monitoring mode date on this line makes it clear they have the same timeline as newly deployed systems to ensure compliance with this requirement.

I also feel a date earlier than monitoring mode for the RPKI-filtering requirement is unenforceable as a CA may decide to **not** issue a certificate for any reason of its choosing. This could be due to a multi-perspective check from non-RPKI filtering perspectives. Since there is no other normative requirement in this ballot before monitoring mode, nothing else in this ballot would be violated, so I feel it is somewhat strange to say a CA is in violation because it went above and beyond and performed this extra check.

@ryancdickson would something like this make sense:

```
Network Perspectives performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration other than the Primary Network Perspective:

- By December 15, 2024 MUST :
    - Forward all Internet traffic via a network or set of networks that filter all RPKI-invalid BGP routes as defined by RFC 6811. 
```

Author: @birgelee - That's a fair perspective regarding the potential for unintentional impact on CA owners who might have already adopted the practice before the ballot becomes effective. 

The way I interpret the requirements (and how I tried to write them):
- The requirements described in the proposal could be added to the BRs at any time.
- Between June 15, 2024, and December 14, 2024: CAs are encouraged but ultimately may optionally choose to support MPIC as described in the proposal. Because MPIC is optional, CAs would not be penalized for an "incomplete" implementation that does not align with subsequent enforcement milestones (like the one described in the next bullet). In this case, if an existing implementer isn't filtering RPKI-invalid routes, that shouldn't be considered a violation of the BRs (because the practice of performing MPIC as described in the ballot is recommended, not required). 
- Beginning December 15, 2024: MPIC is required (to include those requirements related to the quorum and network perspective security controls - like filtering RPKI-invalid routes); however, CAs are not yet required to block issuance if the primary perspective is not corroborated via MPIC checks. 

To that end, the filtering of RPKI-invalid routes would become effective on December 15, 2024 - but the same is true for all other related requirements. This, for example, is why we noted 12/15/24 as the "Relevant Date" for MPIC included in 1.2.2.

Given the above, does that change your opinion?

Reviewer 3: If this is how the text is interpreted without any date specified on this line, I am fine removing any date reference here.

@ryancdickson Do you have any thoughts on the "other than the Primary Network Perspective" language change? My understanding was that the ballot draft was not to change the existing DV infrastructure but simply require new infrastructure to have RPKI filtering.

Author: @birgelee - It feels unnecessary to me.

I wouldn't consider the Primary Perspective as "performing" MPIC (instead, the remote perspectives are performing MPIC to corroborate the determinations made by the Primary Perspective) - meaning there's no need to further exclude the Primary Perspective from the scope of these requirements (as it already is excluded).

Reviewer 8: Would simply changing
> Network Perspectives performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration:

to

> Remote Network Perspectives performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration:

Be enough to ensure it wont impact the Primary Perspective?

Author: Added in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/cb88b7d7bec8717e9903f6c91adbf0171f68681b

> Remote Network Perspectives performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration:

Reviewer 7: I couldn't find rule about where a remote perspective considered to be? Natural answer would be where is the metel it hosted is as this removed no delegation requirement we can't guarantee everything RP does happen at same place. For example HTTP validation RP in JP re‐delegate DNS lookup to public DNS hosted in US and still be legal; but can we say that RP is actually at anywhere?

Reviewer 3: The definition of a network perspective's location is with the definition of a "Network Perspective" in the definitions section (line 383). I am curios if you would recommend putting this somewhere else in the document.

 https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/blob/0144a4c0e544173d22a0f09fd4c45d4a52519992/docs/BR.md?plain=1#L383

The text on location currently reads:

`The location of a Network Perspective is determined by the point where unencapsulated outbound Internet traffic is first handed off to the network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to that perspective.`

In many cases this equates to the definition you mentioned of having the location be where the metal hosting the perspective is. Notably in cases of VPN tunneling, the perspective's location becomes the location where VPN traffic is unencapsulated.

@orangepizza You do have a good point about not everything happening in one place, and I had thought a bit about that DNS angle when coming up with text for this line. Ultimately, I felt the most important attribute of this definition was for it to be well-defined and auditable, and given the fact the DNS is often outsourced, I felt it would be cleaner to define it as where the perspective itself hands off Internet traffic.

I think two points to note when considering this is that:
1) the only current diversity requirement in the document references the service regions of different RIRs (essentially continents), so some variance in location between a perspective and its DNS provider will not undermine that diversity
2) I personally find it unlikely for performance reasons that a perspective would outsource DNS to another continent. All of the major public DNS resolvers are globally anycast, and other 3rd-party DNS resolvers (e.g., from local ISPs) will also likely be relatively close to the perspective in question. It is usually faster to run DNS resolvers near where queries are originated, and I feel this will help prevent the problem you are discussing. DNS resolvers in other continents can also cause issues with goegraphic load balancing, so distant DNS resolvers are generally not recommended for that reason as well.

It is worth mentioning that at Princeton we have recently made significant advances in tooling to measure the effectiveness of deployed MPIC implementations against real-world ethical BGP attacks. These measurements include measurements of DNS behavior (i.e., we can determine whether a perspective's DNS was fooled by a BGP hijack). I feel that this type of work could shed light on whether outsourced DNS is a real problem for MPIC (in which case maybe a more-specific definition is needed) or if the system generally behaves as expected. In the meantime, I personally like the simpler definition as I do not want compliance and auditability to be obstacles for the MPIC initiative.

Reviewer 7: Well, there is another rule(L1060) about network locations:  `Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in is at least 500 km`. and I don't think public resolver should be able to used in MRP context, as for CAA or some challenges like 3.2.2.4.7 or call to contact on DNS challenges DNS lookup is only thing that remote perspective will done, and "public resolver" isn't something really definable: only definition it can have without making actual whitelist will be "any open resolver is public DNS", and allowing that won't end well.

Reviewer 3: To clarify, I simply mentioned public DNS resolvers as examples of DNS resolvers. I do not think it makes sense to add any specific text regarding public DNS resolvers.

I see your point that for CAA and some challenges remote perspectives are only sending DNS queries. What about adding text to ensure DNS resolver locations have the same diversity required of network perspectives? Potentially around line 1057 https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/blob/0144a4c0e544173d22a0f09fd4c45d4a52519992/docs/BR.md?plain=1#L1057

I think a statement along these lines could enforce DNS resolver diversity.

`A network perspective MAY use a recursive DNS resolver that is not co-located with that network perspective. However, the DNS resolver used by a network perspective MUST fall within the same Regional Internet Registry service region as that network perspective. Furthermore, for any pair of DNS resolvers used on a Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempt, the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries the DNS resolvers reside in MUST be at least 500 km. The location of a DNS resolver is determined by the point where unencapsulated outbound DNS queries are first handed off to the network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to that DNS resolver.`

Author: Minor tweaks, addressed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/6cca62b0b96ee49295e1d7c61cf5f85b7a1a5f27.

- SHOULD:
    - Facility & Service Provider Requirements
      - Be hosted from an ISO/IEC 27001 certified facility or equivalent security framework independently audited and certified or reported. 
      - Rely on services covered in one of the following reports: System and Organization Controls 2 (SOC 2), IASE 3000, ENISA 715, FedRAMP Moderate, C5:2020, CSA STAR CCM, or equivalent services framework independently audited and certified or reported.

>     - Network Hardening

Reviewer 8: Apologies if this is already handled, or is outside the scope of this ballot, but should there be any requirement on how the CA communicates with the remote network perspective?

For example, if the remote network perspective was a simple DNS Resolver, and the CA queried it with a UDP DNS request. Would that meet the requirements of the ballot, but also still be susceptible to a MiM attack

Would specifying communication between CA and Remote network perspective must be over a secure, encrypted channel (TLS, VPN) be a good addition?

Reviewer 3: That would make sense to me. I think there was always a bit of an understanding in the working group that communication between the different network perspectives needed to be over a secure and authenticated channel to avoid those types of attacks. I feel some ballot language to clarify that would be a good idea.

Reviewer 8: Thanks @birgelee
Where would be the best place to add this language?
@ryancdickson, do you have thoughts on this?

Author: @kingcdavid - How do you feel about the following addition?

_"All communications between remote Network Perspectives and the CA MUST be encrypted using Transport Layer Security (TLS) Version 1.2 or higher using secure ciphersuites that ensure forward secrecy. TLS Version 1.3 SHOULD be used."_

Suggestions welcome.

Reviewer 8: I think that looks good, Is there any alternative to TLS though? i.e. would un-encrypted traffic (DNS UDP again) over a IPSec VPN also be secure enough? Just thinking we may not want to restrict on technology?

instead we could have:

> "All communications between remote Network Perspectives and the CA MUST be encrypted using suitable encryption methods, i.e Transport Layer Security (TLS). If TLS, Version 1.2 or higher using secure ciphersuites that ensure forward secrecy. TLS Version 1.3 SHOULD be used."

Reviewer 3: @kingcdavid I defiantly think not being specific to a particular authenticated encryption method is a good idea. I feel an IPSec VPN would give proper security. Another technique for communication with remote perspectives that I have heard discussed is using WireGuard which is also quite secure and a commonly used practice.

I can't tell if it makes sense to add something about the encryption being "authenticated" just to clarify that it should be robust even against an adversary that can manipulate packets (e.g., not just a plane DF key exchange that is vulnerable to an on-path adversary but would count as encryption).

Author: How about: "_All communications between remote Network Perspectives and the CA MUST take place over an authenticated and encrypted channel relying on modern protocols (e.g., over HTTPS)._" ?

Reviewer 8: I'm good with that, ensures that it will be secure and also give scope to use any suitable technology

Thanks!

Author: Added here: https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/6bda42e6307b2c62c952df946c2144c17d13f55c

The existing "MUST" list didn't feel like an appropriate location given those requirements are specific to remote perspectives --- and this change also implicates the CA.

Author: Marking thread as resolved. Thanks for feedback @kingcdavid and @birgelee!

CAs MUST document potential issuances that were prevented by a CAA record in sufficient detail to provide feedback to the CAB Forum on the circumstances, and SHOULD dispatch reports of such issuance requests to the contact(s) stipulated in the CAA iodef record(s), if present. CAs are not expected to support URL schemes in the iodef record other than mailto: or https:.

#### 3.2.2.9 Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration

> Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the determinations made by the Primary Network Perspective from multiple additional Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. This process can improve protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the determinations made by the Primary Network Perspective from multiple additional Network Perspectives before Certificate issuance. This process can improve protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.
```

Author: Accepting suggestion.

_Note: This edit creates consistency with [this](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8/commits/4d658f5dbcae850784ed8f153f14ba5c8921ec35) earlier accepted comment._

> Each corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently verify: 

Reviewer 5: I have a question about the use of the word "verify" in this statement.  To me, that implies that every remote perspective must _check_ the value found there is what is expected, is this intentional?

Why I'm asking is that this language seems to imply that when doing MPIC for DNS changes, the CA must say to the remote perspectives "Go and check the DNS TXT record for example.com.  The value you must see there is \<random_value\>.  Return true/false depending on if you saw \<random_value\> or not."  There the remote perspective has independently verified the DNS change.

However, this only really works like this for agreed upon changes to websites/DNS changes.  For all the contact information validation methods the call _must_ be "Go and get the email contact information for example.com from the domain name registrar" because there's not anything to verify as the goal is to make sure that the contact information is the same from many perspectives.

For the sake of simplicity, and cleanliness of interfaces, it would be nice to retain the option to have every remote network perspective call to be "Go and get \<thing\> from \<record_type\> for example.com".  The next step would be having the CA look at the responses from all perspectives and then determining if the primary perspective and x of y remote perspectives all saw the correct value and then any different behaviour for contact information vs expected changes could be applied.  However, I'm not sure this approach is valid if "Each corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently _verify_ [ed. my emphasis]" the expected random value/token.

Author: I suspect most implementations will follow what you describe above, where the remote perspectives are fetching data and returning it to the CA for the quorum calculation. IMO, CAs should be free to perform these checks as they see fit (i.e., What you see in this DNS record?" or "Do you see $value(s) in this DNS record?")

Examples using 3.2.2.4.14 (Email to DNS TXT Contact) below.

Primary Perspective DNS lookup: sees `123@example.com` and `456@example.com`

### Example of Approach 1: "What do you see?"
- Remote Perspective 1 DNS lookup: sees `123@example.com`, `abc@example.com`
- Remote Perspective 2 DNS lookup: sees `abc@example.com`
- Remote Perspective 3 DNS lookup: sees `123@example.com`, `456@example.com`, and `abc@example.com`
- Remote Perspective 4 DNS lookup: sees `123@example.com`, `456@example.com`, and `abc@example.com`
- Remote Perspective 5 DNS lookup: sees `123@example.com`

**Evaluating observations:**
- `123@example.com`: corroborated by 4/5 perspectives
- `456@example.com`: corroborated by 2/5 perspectives
- `abc@example.com`: N/A, not observed by primary.

### Example of Approach 2: "Do you see this value?" (assumes the above values in DNS)
- Does Remote Perspective 1 DNS lookup see `123@example.com`?: true
- Does Remote Perspective 2 DNS lookup see `123@example.com`?: false
- Does Remote Perspective 3 DNS lookup see `123@example.com`?: true
- Does Remote Perspective 4 DNS lookup see `123@example.com`?: true
- Does Remote Perspective 1 DNS lookup see `123@example.com`?: true

**Evaluating observations:**
- 123@example.com corroborated by 4/5 perspectives

------

Given the above, how do you feel the following update addresses your concern?

### From
Each corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently verify: 
- a. the presence of the expected 1) Random Value, 2) Request Token, 3) IP Address, or 4) Contact Address, as required by the relied upon validation method specified in Sections 3.2.2.4 and 3.2.2.5; and
- b. the CA's authority to issue to the requested domain(s), as specified in Section 3.2.2.8.

### To
The response returned from each corroborating Network Perspective MUST allow the CA to verify: 
- a. the presence of the expected 1) Random Value, 2) Request Token, 3) IP Address, or 4) Contact Address, as required by the relied upon validation method specified in Sections 3.2.2.4 and 3.2.2.5; and
- b. the CA's authority to issue to the requested domain(s), as specified in Section 3.2.2.8.

This removes the "independently" clause, but I feel that's somewhat redundant given "results or information obtained from one Network Perspective MUST not be reused or cached" a little later.

Suggestions also welcome, @robplee.

Reviewer 5: I agree that the BRs shouldn't be overly proscriptive and CAs should be able to choose either options depending on what suits them best.

I definitely like the "MUST allow the CA to verify" change, it clears up my confusion very well thank-you.  I think the loss of the "independently" point is fine given the wider context of the "not be reused or cached" point and also the later definition of what it is for network perspectives to be distinct.

Author: Pushed new language in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/ba979635b3b31fe842b226cb2a66bc16ede78036.

Marking conversation as resolved, thanks for your comment @robplee.

CAs MUST document potential issuances that were prevented by a CAA record in sufficient detail to provide feedback to the CAB Forum on the circumstances, and SHOULD dispatch reports of such issuance requests to the contact(s) stipulated in the CAA iodef record(s), if present. CAs are not expected to support URL schemes in the iodef record other than mailto: or https:.

> #### 3.2.2.9 Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration

Reviewer 2: I'm unable to leave a comment on line 1058 (https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8/files#diff-e0ac1bd190515a4f2ec09139d395ef6a8c7e9e5b612957c1f5a2dea80c6a6cfeR1058) since it wasn't modified, so I'll leave it here:

My understanding is that CAs will be able to issue if the lookup failures for both the Primary and Secondary Network Perspectives are consistent. For example, if the Primary Perspective receives a SERVFAIL in response to a CAA lookup for "example.com" and the Secondary Network Perspectives receive the same, then this can be treated as permission to issue (assuming, of course, there's no DNSSEC chain to the ICANN root and the CA infrastructure isn't experiencing issues). However, if the Primary Perspective observes a SERVFAIL and the Secondary Perspectives receive a NOERROR/NXDOMAIN, then this cannot be treated as permission to issue as the Primary and Secondary Perspectives have received differing responses.

Is this correct, or is the expectation different here?

Reviewer 3: While this is one interpretation of the text, my original thought was that it would be OK for a CA to proceed with issuance under the second scenario described. Even though the error signals from the different perspectives are distinct, in the absence of a trusted DNSSEC chain, both of these can be treated as permission to issue. Thus, my original interpretation of this was "corroborates" is essentially a binary state and both the primary and secondary perspectives here interpret their DNS response as permission to issue implying issuance can proceed.

While requiring matching error messages or matching responses is clearly a stricter policy, I do not think it adds too much security, and I worry a bit about it introducing false positives. If an adversary has launched a BGP hijack which effects some of a CA's perspectives, it has the liberty of choosing what types of DNS responses it wants to generate and could likely generate responses that match the victims' (bypassing this sameness check). On the benign side, in our last study we noticed discrepancies in DNS configurations when probed from multiple perspectives. Many DNS providers rely heavily on IP anycast so the DNS queries from the different perspectives are often being answered by different servers (which can have different configurations or out-of-date zone files). Thus, while varying error messages may seemingly indicate an attack, I could also see it arising in benign circumstances, and I believe an adversary could avoid this check.

Additionally, we considered differentiating between different types of responses in the domain validation check, but ultimately backed away from it and went more towards reducing each vantage point's response to a binary state which is then processed in the quorum policy. I personally feel for consistency and simplicity it would also make sense to use that reasoning here.

I would be in favor of adding language to clarify that permission to issue is a binary state (i.e., can issue or can't issue) which is then processed by the quorum policy.

Reviewer 2: Line 1061 of the current draft text says:

> Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the determinations made by the Primary Network Perspective from multiple additional Network Perspectives

It is my understanding that this explanatory text is stating that the Primary Network Perspective provides the canonical response, and the requisite number of additional Network Perspectives MUST provide the same response to corroborate the response as retrieved by the Primary Network Perspective. My understanding of the rationale is that the Primary Network Perspective is audited under the NetSec audit regime, whereas secondary Network Perspectives need not be audited. Thus, there is a higher level of assurance from the responses provided by the Primary as opposed to secondary Network Perspectives.

Given this rationale, I interpreted the CAA allowance for issuance upon encountering lookup errors as "the requisite number of secondary Network Perspectives must observe the failure observed by the Primary Network Perspective in order to be treated as permission to issue". I think clarifying language is needed if the intended requirement is actually looser.

Author: @CBonnell - would better establishing context for "determinations" (and doing so at a sufficient level of detail that's focused on the outcome of the checks) address this concern?

**From:** Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the determinations made by the Primary Network Perspective from multiple additional Network Perspectives before Certificate issuance.

**To:** Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the determinations ```(i.e., domain validation pass/fail, CAA permission/prohibition)``` made by the Primary Network Perspective from multiple additional Network Perspectives before Certificate issuance.

Author: Update: Added above suggestion in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/0144a4c0e544173d22a0f09fd4c45d4a52519992, still waiting for feedback from @CBonnell.

Reviewer 2: Apologies for missing this; it apparently got lost in a flurry of Github notifications. I don't think the proposed language change would address the difference in interpretation for the "CAA lookup failure" case as discussed above in this comment thread. I interpret the proposed language the same as the previous language: a CAA lookup failure by the Primary Network Perspective while the Secondary Perspectives observe a lookup success cannot be treated as permission to issue, as the Secondary Perspective results do not corroborate the Primary Perspective's lookup failure.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a solution could be to add @ryancdickson 's language but also put an explicit statement to cover this case in the section on MPIC CAA checking:

When corroborating a CAA check from multiple Network Perspectives, for the result of the CAA check at an additional Network Perspective to count as corroborating the Primary Network Perspective, the CAA check from the additional Network Perspective MUST be interpreted as permission to issue as outlined in Section [3.2.2.8](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/blob/0144a4c0e544173d22a0f09fd4c45d4a52519992/docs/BR.md#3228-caa-records). However, a CA MAY count the response of an additional Network Perspective as corroborating the Primary Network Perspective even if CAA records seen by the additional Network Perspective do not match the records seen by the Primary Network Perspective or one or both of the additional Network Perspective or Primary Network Perspective experience an acceptable CAA record lookup failure as defined in Section [3.2.2.8](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/blob/0144a4c0e544173d22a0f09fd4c45d4a52519992/docs/BR.md#3228-caa-records).

Personally I feel adding language along these lines to explicitly allow this case would sufficiently clarify things in the document. Thinking more on this topic I do feel that some of the confusion comes from the use of the word "corroborate" which implies some level of similarity in responses (which makes sense in the DV context where a similar random token on piece of contact information must be observed). However, for CAA checking I think it makes the most sense to not rely on similarity (particularly with some lookup failures being permission to issue in the CAA context) but instead ensure a sufficient number of network perspectives interpret their lookups as permission to issue. Maybe another approach would be to avoid using the word "corroborate" in the CAA context, but I worry a bit reworking the whole draft with that angle would simply introduce more wording issue.

Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the determinations made by the Primary Network Perspective from multiple additional Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. This process can improve protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.

Each corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently verify: 

> - the presence of the expected 1) Random Value, 2) Request Token, 3) IP Address, or 4) Contact Address, as required by the relied upon validation method specified in Sections 3.2.2.4 and 3.2.2.5, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a. the presence of the expected 1) Random Value, 2) Request Token, 3) IP Address, or 4) Contact Address, as required by the relied upon validation method specified in Sections 3.2.2.4 and 3.2.2.5; and
```

> - the CA's authority to issue to the requested domain(s) or IP address(es), as specified in Section 3.2.2.8

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
b. the CA's authority to issue to the requested domain(s), as specified in Section 3.2.2.8.
```

[Section 3.2.2.4](#3224-validation-of-domain-authorization-or-control) and [Section 3.2.2.5](#3225-authentication-for-an-ip-address) describe the validation methods that require the use of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration and how a Network Perspective can corroborate the outcomes determined by the Primary Network Perspective. A CA MAY use corroborating evidence for CAA record compliance for a period equal to the period of validity for Validation of Domain Authorization or Control specified in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions).

Results or information obtained from one Network Perspective MUST NOT be reused or cached when performing validation through subsequent Network Perspectives (e.g., different Network Perspectives cannot rely on a shared DNS cache to prevent an adversary with control of traffic from one Network Perspective from poisoning the DNS cache used by other Network Perspectives). The network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to a Network Perspective MAY be administered by the same organization providing the computational services required to operate the Network Perspective.

> CAs MAY immediately retry Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration using the same validation method or an alternative method (e.g., a CA can immediately retry validation using "Email to DNS TXT Contact" if "Agreed-Upon Change to Website - ACME" does not corroborate the outcome of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration). There is no stipulation regarding the maximum number of validation attempts that may be performed in any period of time.

Reviewer 5: Question: does "[retrying] Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration" mean retrying the entire process (Primary Network Perspective and all remote perspectives) or could it mean just retrying the perspectives that have failed?  I think it should mean the former but I think this text could be clearer on this point.

Perhaps this:
```suggestion
CAs MAY immediately retry Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration, checking all Network Perspectives, using the same validation method or an alternative method (e.g., a CA can immediately retry validation using "Email to DNS TXT Contact" if "Agreed-Upon Change to Website - ACME" does not corroborate the outcome of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration). There is no stipulation regarding the maximum number of validation attempts that may be performed in any period of time.
```

Author: Good point, @robplee. 

IMO, we should also avoid "locking in" CAs from reusing the same set of perspectives that resulted in the failure (e.g., failure may have happened because one of the perspectives is down and can't even attempt to corroborate). Our primary objective is ensuring that there's no "reuse" of corroborations across attempts.

What do you think of [this](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/b5b3c5afc6af4f648ea72bdee3cd535fc000edbd) change?

Reviewer 5: I think that change is excellent and perfectly addresses my concern.  I agree on not being locked into perspectives, the main thing I wanted to avoid was a situation where 1 perspective passes and 3 fail so then the server tries three perspectives and now only 2 fail etc as then the BGP issues may still be there, they just involve a bit more work and a bit less timing!

The "Quorum Requirements" Table describes quorum requirements related to Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration. Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in is at least 500 km.

Table: Quorum Requirements

| # of Distinct Network Perspectives Used | # of Allowed non-Corroborations |
| --- | --- |

> | 2-5 |  1  |

Reviewer 5: Doesn't allowing one non-corroboration when only two distinct network perspectives have been used nullify any benefit provided by multi-perspective checking?  The motivation behind bringing in multi-perspective issuance corroboration is that an attacker might be able to do BGP shenanigans against one of your perspectives, so a CA should bring in more perspectives because they probably can't interfere with multiple perspectives at the same time so easily.  Given our attacker can pull off one BGP attack against a CAs infrastructure isn't it a problem to allow issuance where there are only two perspectives and one has a non-corroboration?

Suggested change to the table:
```suggestion
| 2     |  0  |
| 3-5 |  1  |
```

Reviewer 3: In general I agree with you that two perspectives with one non-corroborating is a relatively week security improvement. There is still some improvement as the attacker now as to fool the CA's primary infrastructure plus an additional network perspective, but this is not particularly hard.

I think the original motivation for this particular policy was simply to promote an easy transition. This configuration requires a CA to deploy as few remote perspectives as possible and permits issuance under quite liberal policies which can help ensure MPDV does not interfere with benign operations. Per the timeline text, this policy can only be used between June and December 2025 at which point two remote perspectives is no longer permitted.

Personally I am fine leaving or changing this line. Since this configuration is only active for 6 months, I do not think there is a major security incentive one way or the other.

Reviewer 5: To me, what change is needed in this section comes down to what counts towards the total "# of Distinct Network Perspectives Used".  I had assumed the total of distinct network perspectives includes all network perspectives used _including_ the Primary Network Perspective.  Your comment sounds like you are only counting the additional perspectives towards the total.

If your interpretation is correct then I think the numbers in the table are fine.  In this situation, your assessment of the security benefit is completely fair as you're right to say that an attacker would need to fool the primary infrastructure and an additional network perspective.  In this case, I think some language needs changing in the above text to make this much clearer because I didn't understand this to be what was meant by the "# of Distinct Network Perspectives Used".

If the total in the left hand column does include the Primary Network Perspective, as I assumed it does, then I feel like my comment stands and where there is only the Primary Network Perspective and a single other Network Perspective then the two perspectives have to agree to allow issuance.

Reviewer 3: I am glad this can be clarified. I was interpreting the table as "# of Distinct Network Perspectives Used in Addition to the Primary Perspective". Maybe a clean resolution would be to clarify this in the column description for the table:

```
| # of Distinct Network Perspectives Used in Addition to the Primary Network Perspective | # of Allowed non-Corroborations |
```

@robplee let me know if this adds sufficient clarity to the table.

Reviewer 5: So, that's one option that would definitely add clarity.  I wonder if a cleaner solution would be to come up with a name for the non-Primary Network Perspectives then this column could be the # of Distinct <Word> Network Perspectives and it'd be clearer that it's counting the non-primary network perspectives.  Would "Remote" or "Secondary" work?

Author: Sorry for the slow response to these comments.

@robplee - I agree that we could do a better job of making it clear that the perspectives used for MPIC are separate from the primary. 

What do you think about [these](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/46f6059bcee06384e4600c66aa05745a9fe7a3d4) changes?

Reviewer 5: @ryancdickson change looks great, consider this thread resolved :)

Author: Appreciate your review and feedback, @robplee!

    - System Hardening
      - Disable all accounts, applications, services, protocols, and ports that are not used.
      - Implement multi-factor authentication for all user accounts.
    - Vulnerability Detection and Patch Management
      - Implement intrusion detection and prevention controls to protect against common network and system threats.
      - Document and follow a vulnerability correction process that addresses the identification, review, response, and remediation of vulnerabilities.
      - Undergo or perform a Vulnerability Scan at least every three (3) months.
      - Undergo a Penetration Test on at least an annual basis.
      - Apply recommended security patches within six (6) months of the security patch's availability, unless the CA documents that the security patch would introduce additional vulnerabilities or instabilities that outweigh the benefits of applying the security patch.

Beyond the above considerations, computing systems performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration are considered outside of the audit scope described in Section 8 of these Requirements. 

> If any of the above considerations are performed by a Delegated Third Party, the CA MAY obtain reasonable evidence from the Delegated Third Party to ascertain assurance that one or more of the above considerations are followed. Delegated Third Parties are not required to be within the audit scope described in Section 8 of these Requirements to satisfy the above considerations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If any of the above considerations are performed by a Delegated Third Party, the CA MAY obtain reasonable evidence from the Delegated Third Party to ascertain assurance that one or more of the above considerations are followed. As an exception to Section 1.3.2, Delegated Third Parties are not required to be within the audit scope described in Section 8 of these Requirements to satisfy the above considerations.
```

Author: Committing suggestion (this is the intended outcome, and this suggestion makes it more explicit).

Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in is at least 500 km.

The network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to a Network Perspective MAY be administered by the same organization providing the computational services required to operate the Network Perspective. 

Each primary and corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently complete the entirety of the following:
- the domain validation process used to establish the Primary Domain Validation Determination (including DNS lookups for A records), and
- the CAA record-checking process used to establish the Primary CAA Determination. 

Results or information obtained from one Network Perspective MUST NOT be reused or cached when performing validation through subsequent Network Perspectives (e.g., different Network Perspectives cannot rely on a shared DNS cache to prevent an adversary with control of traffic from one Network Perspective from poisoning the DNS cache used by other Network Perspectives).

> [Section 3.2.2.4](#3224-validation-of-domain-authorization-or-control) and [Section 3.2.2.5](#3225-authentication-for-an-ip-address) describe the validation methods that require the use of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration and how a Network Perspective can corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and the Primary CAA Determination. A CA MAY use corroborating evidence for CAA record compliance for a period equal to the period of validity for Validation of Domain Authorization or Control specified in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions).

Reviewer 4: RFC 8659 states:
> The search for a CAA RRset climbs the DNS name tree from the specified label up to, but not including, the DNS root "." until a CAA RRset is found.

This means that for `x.y.z.example.com` the following zones are checked for CAA records, until a record is found.

- x.y.z.example.com
- y.z.example.com
- z.example.com
- example.com
- com

If the domain `example.com` is added and used for domain control validation (including multi-perspective CAA checks), the attacker can still bypass the multi-perspective CAA check by faking the any of the more specific zones with a new CAA record, for example on `x.y.z.example.com` unless multi perspective CAA checking is done at the time of issuance.

The other challenge might be that at the time of domain control validation the context of the certificate might not be known, so this would require checking for `issue` and `issuewild` and potentially other CAA properties and to record the type of certificates that this domain would be authorized for.

The suggestion was to perform multi perspective CAA checking at the time of domain validation control to avoid the performance impact, but it's the question if this really helps as there are different FQDNs and types of certificates to consider that might be unknown at the time of performing domain control validation.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for bringing this up. As I understand this comment there are largely see two factors worth considering:

1: at time of domain control validation, the exact subdomain may not be known, so a CAA recheck would have to be performed at issuance time on the subdomain. 

2: at time of domain control validation, the certificate type may not be known so the whether the issue or issuewild field is used cannot be determined.

My first thoughts on these two points is that cases where point 1 is applicable simply can't benefit as much from this CAA check at DV time clause. Potentially if CAA evidence was collected from multiple perspectives for "example.com" and a customer requested a certificate for sub.example.com, the CAA evidence for example.com could be reused preventing the need to query recursively up the DNS graph from multiple perspectives. However, in my opinion, as @vanbroup mentioned, a query for sub.example.com in CAA would have to be done at time of issuance.

Point 2 is interesting as well, and I could see it becoming more involved if CAA record types grow in complexity. My personal thoughts on this are that the certificate type concern is not too big of an issue. First, there may be some more advanced APIs, but my general understanding of DNS is that a question like "example.com IN CAA" will always return the entire CAA DNS record set (having knowledge of the entire record set is also required in case there are critical flag records). Thus, whenever a CA makes this query, it will retrieve CAA records with both the "issue" and "issuewild" tags. With this in mind, I think the resolution to point 2 is simply to cache the values of the CAA records fetched from multiple vantage points (as opposed to a can issue or can't issue binary flag) and then resolve the issuance status based on the cached values and certificate type at issuance time.

Overall I still feel it makes sense to have this performance optimization in there. I understand there are some cases where it can't be realized and CAA records would still have to be checked from multiple perspectives at issuance time, but I feel checking CAA records from multiple perspectives is very important for the security of the PKI and the future growth of CAA records. I think any way to reduce the latency/resource overhead without compromising security is beneficial.

Reviewer 4: I agree that you could cache the CAA records (assuming DNSSec signatures etc. are validated), and you could potentially do additional checks based on likelihood (like including an MP CAA check for www.example.com). 

But this would not come for free and require quite a bit of additional implementation work (code that could fail), and meta data for each domain.

I think it would be good to dive a bit deeper into the potential impact and realistic performance gain. 

Maybe it could be described as that when MP CAA has been performed it can be re-used until the current domain name validation expires. This way you would only need do the MPV CAA checking at issuance time when it has not been performed since the last domain control validation check.

This would allow the CA to do MP CAA checking at domain control validation, but would also allow them to perform it at issuance time and re-use it in both cases.

Reviewer 3: @vanbroup I do appreciate the points about additional code complexity and extra meta data (which can add up at large scale).

I wanted to take a step back from this problem and actually think about its impact on the threat space. I think one important thing to consider is that the two cases being discussed are related to domain validation reuse for subdomains and wildcard certificate types. My understanding of the BRs is that both of these cases require some form of validation of DNS information (not just control of a server running at that domain) which would be checked from multiple vantage points. Given the adversary can demonstrate this level of control over DNS, the adversary likely also has the ability to also spoof CAA records. I think there still is some attack surface left open by not rechecking sub-domain CAA or issuewild records from multiple vantage points (e.g., an adversary could have compromised domain validation by attacking an external channel like email without actually controlling the target domain's DNS records), but I also think this is not a huge threat surface.

@vanbroup can you put in a suggested change with the language you are proposing. I like the idea you had to permit reuse since the last validation and also permit rechecking at issuance time and caching as an option.

- *Effective September 15, 2025*, the CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least three (3) additional Network Perspectives. Additionally, the Network Perspectives that do corroborate the primary determinations MUST fall within the service regions of at least two (2) distinct regional Internet registries.
- *Effective March 15, 2026*, the CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least four (4) additional Network Perspectives. 
- *Effective September 15, 2026*, the CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least five (5) additional Network Perspectives. 

Table: Quorum Requirements

| # Network Perspectives Used | # of Allowed non-Corroborations |
| --- | --- |
| 2-5 |  1  |
| 6+  |  2  |

Network Perspectives performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration:

- MUST:
    - Forward all Internet traffic via a network or set of networks that filter all RPKI-invalid BGP routes as defined by RFC 6811. 

- SHOULD:
    - Facility & Service Provider Requirements

>       - Be hosted from an ISO/IEC 27001 certified facility or equivalent. 

Reviewer 9: I don't recall the reason for singling out ISO 27001 here. Was the criteria that it's an independently audited and certified security framework? If so, I think we should append that to this requirement:

"Be hosted from an ISO/IEC 27001 certified facility or equivalent **security framework independently audited and certified or reported**."

Author: Suggestion LGTM, will incorporate.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/de1ff61609a027bfd0cf5183285a1a4d80da7e4a

>       - Rely on services covered in one of the following reports: System and Organization Controls 3 (SOC 3), IASE 3000, ENISA 715, FedRAMP Moderate, C5:2020, CSA STAR CCM, or equivalent.

Reviewer 9: Same comment as above: "...or equivalent **services framework independently audited and certified or reported**."

SOC 3 is rarely used as a compliance requirement. To receive a SOC 3 report an organization must undergo a SOC 2 audit. I suggest we just use SOC 2 here.

Author: Good suggestions, will incorporate.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/commit/de1ff61609a027bfd0cf5183285a1a4d80da7e4a

    - Network Hardening
      - Configure each network boundary control (firewall, switch, router, gateway, or other network control device or system) with rules that support only the services, protocols, ports, and communications identified as necessary to its operations.
    - System Hardening
      - Disable all accounts, applications, services, protocols, and ports that are not used.
      - Implement multi-factor authentication for all user accounts.
    - Vulnerability Detection and Patch Management
      - Implement intrusion detection and prevention controls to protect against common network and system threats.
      - Document and follow a vulnerability correction process that addresses the identification, review, response, and remediation of vulnerabilities.
      - Undergo or perform a Vulnerability Scan at least every three (3) months.
      - Undergo a Penetration Test on at least an annual basis.
      - Apply recommended security patches within six (6) months of the security patch's availability, unless the CA documents that the security patch would introduce additional vulnerabilities or instabilities that outweigh the benefits of applying the security patch.

> Beyond the above considerations, computing systems performing Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration are considered outside of the audit scope described in Section 8 of these Requirements. 

Reviewer 10: Has anyone asked WebTrust/ETSI reps for input on how they will interpret this paragraph? They may be able to suggest changes that clarify what should be audited or to make the requirements more auditable.

Author: We had a meeting with Tim (BDO) 2 or 3 months ago to collect general recommendations for the text, but did not focus specifically on interpretations.

I'll take action to follow-up with a broader set of audit stakeholders.

CAs MUST document potential issuances that were prevented by a CAA record in sufficient detail to provide feedback to the CAB Forum on the circumstances, and SHOULD dispatch reports of such issuance requests to the contact(s) stipulated in the CAA iodef record(s), if present. CAs are not expected to support URL schemes in the iodef record other than mailto: or https:.

#### 3.2.2.9 Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration

Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts to corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination by re-completing the entirety of the domain validation process from multiple additional geographic Network Perspectives before subscriber certificate issuance. This process can improve protection against equally-specific prefix Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) attacks or hijacks.

> Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in are separated by a distance of at least 500 km.

Reviewer: Either
```suggestion
Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the straight-line distance between the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in is at least 500 km.
```
or
```suggestion
Network Perspectives are considered distinct when the two States, Provinces, or Countries they reside in are separated by a straight-line distance of at least 500 km.
```

The network infrastructure providing Internet connectivity to a Network Perspective MAY be administered by the same organization providing the computational services required to operate the Network Perspective. 

Each primary and corroborating Network Perspective MUST independently complete the entirety of the following:

> - the domain validation process used to establish the Primary Domain Validation Determination (i.e., including DNS lookups for A records), and

Reviewer: I don't think this is a "in other words", looking up A records is only one part of the DV process.
```suggestion
- the domain validation process used to establish the Primary Domain Validation Determination (including DNS lookups for A records), and
```

[Section 3.2.2.4](#3224-validation-of-domain-authorization-or-control) and [Section 3.2.2.5](#3225-authentication-for-an-ip-address) describe the validation methods that require the use of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration and how a Network Perspective can corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and the Primary CAA Determination. A CA MAY use corroborating evidence for CAA record compliance for a period equal to the period of validity for Validation of Domain Authorization or Control specified in [Section 4.2.1](#421-performing-identification-and-authentication-functions).

The "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" Table describes quorum requirements related to Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration. 

CAs MAY immediately retry Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration using the same validation method or an alternative method (e.g., a CA can immediately retry validation using "Email to DNS TXT Contact" if "Agreed-Upon Change to Website - ACME" does not corroborate the outcome of Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration). There is no stipulation regarding the maximum number of validation attempts that may be performed in any period of time.

> Phased Implementation Timeline:
> - *Effective March 15, 2024*, the CA SHOULD implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section. 
> - *Effective September 15, 2024*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section; however, the CA MAY proceed with certificate issuance if either the Primary Domain Validation Determination or Primary CAA Determination is not corroborated as defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table.
> - *Effective March 15, 2025*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section. The CA MUST NOT proceed with certificate issuance if either the Primary Domain Validation Determination or Primary CAA Determination is not corroborated as defined in the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table and the "Defining Corroborating CAA Evidence" table.
> 
> Even though the "# of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements" table permits issuance when some Network Perspectives do not corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination, the set of locations of the Network Perspectives that do corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination MUST fall within the service regions of at least two (2) distinct regional Internet registries for a CA to proceed with certificate issuance after September 15, 2025.
> 
> Table: # of Network Perspectives and Quorum Requirements
> 
> | # Network Perspectives used | Description of Configuration and Quorum Requirements | Permitted Use |
> |--- |------------------------------ |------------------------------ |
> | 2  | This configuration relies on two (2) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least one (1) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2025. |
> | 3  | This configuration relies on three (3) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least two (2) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination.  | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 3/15/2026. |
> | 4  | This configuration relies on four (4) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least three (3) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | This configuration MUST NOT be used after 9/15/2026. |
> | 5  | This configuration relies on five (5) Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least four (4) of the Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | - |
> | 6+ | This configuration relies on six (6) or more (i.e., "N") Network Perspectives.<br><br>When this configuration is used, at least N-2 Network Perspectives MUST corroborate the Primary Domain Validation Determination and Primary CAA Determination. | - |

Reviewer: We have three kinda-separate, kinda-continuous timelines here:
1) The "how fully implemented" timeline, presented as a bulleted list, from 2024/03/15 through 2025/03/15
2) The "how far apart" timeline, presented as a standalone paragraph, with one date on 2025/09/15
3) The "how many perspectives" timeline, presented as a table, with dates from 2025/09/15 through 2026/09/15

Honestly I think it would be great for this to be all one timeline, with consistent presentation and monotonic dates. Perhaps something like this:

```suggestion
Phased Implementation Timeline:
- *Effective March 15, 2024*, the CA SHOULD implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section. 
- *Effective September 15, 2024*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section. However, the CA MAY proceed with certificate issuance if the number of additional Network Perspectives which do not corroborate either the Primary Domain Validation Determination or Primary CAA Determination is greater than the number allowed in the "Quorum Requirements" table. The CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least two (2) additional Network Perspectives.
- *Effective March 15, 2025*, the CA MUST NOT proceed with certificate issuance if the number of additional Network Perspectives which do not corroborate either the Primary Domain Validation Determination or Primary CAA Determination greater than the number allowed in the "Quorum Requirements" table.
- *Effective September 15, 2025*, the CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least three (3) additional Network Perspectives. Additionally, the Network Perspectives that do corroborate the primary determinations MUST fall within the service regions of at least two (2) distinct regional Internet registries.
- *Effective March 15, 2026*, the CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least four (4) additional Network Perspectives.
- *Effective September 15, 2026*, the CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least five (5) additional Network Perspectives.

Table: Quorum Requirements

| # Network Perspectives used | # of Allowed non-Corroborations |
| --- | --- |
| 2-5 |  1  |
| 6+  |  2  |
```

Maybe this is way too big of a formatting change for this late in the process. But I thought it was worth considering anyway. What do you think?

Author: Thanks, @aarongable!

I think this is a helpful simplification. I'll accept this suggestion, and probably tweak things a bit further (for example, to promote consistent use of "primary determinations" vs "Primary Domain Validation Determination or Primary CAA Determination.")

Will leave discussion open for visibility.

Phased Implementation Timeline:
- *Effective March 15, 2024*, the CA SHOULD implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section. 

> - *Effective September 15, 2024*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section. However, the CA MAY proceed with certificate issuance if the number of additional Network Perspectives which do not corroborate the primary determinations ("non-corroborations) is greater than the number allowed in the "Quorum Requirements" table. The CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least two (2) additional Network Perspectives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Effective September 15, 2024*, the CA MUST implement Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration as described in this section. However, the CA MAY proceed with certificate issuance if the number of additional Network Perspectives which do not corroborate the primary determinations ("non-corroborations") is greater than the number allowed in the "Quorum Requirements" table. The CA MUST attempt to corroborate the primary determinations from at least two (2) additional Network Perspectives.
```

   4. Issuance of Certificates; 
   5. Generation of Certificate Revocation Lists; and 
   6. Signing of OCSP Responses (as described in [Section 4.9](#49-certificate-revocation-and-suspension) and [Section 4.10](#410-certificate-status-services)).
   7. Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts from each Network Perspective, minimally recording the following information:

>       - an identifier that uniquely identifies the perspective used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      a. an identifier that uniquely identifies the Network Perspective used;
```

Reviewer 2: It's a nit, but items in numbered lists are easier to reference than in bulleted lists

Author: Good point, and worth considering in https://github.com/cabforum/servercert/issues/432 (added)

Committing suggestion.

>       - the attempted domain name or IP address

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      b. the attempted domain name and/or IP address; and
```

>       - the result of the attempt (i.e., "DCV pass/fail, CAA allow/disallow")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      c. the result of the attempt (e.g., "domain validation pass/fail", "CAA permission/prohibition").
```

   4. Issuance of Certificates; 
   5. Generation of Certificate Revocation Lists; and 
   6. Signing of OCSP Responses (as described in [Section 4.9](#49-certificate-revocation-and-suspension) and [Section 4.10](#410-certificate-status-services)).
   7. Multi-Perspective Issuance Corroboration attempts from each Network Perspective, minimally recording the following information:
      - an identifier that uniquely identifies the perspective used

>       - the attempted domain name

Reviewer: MPIC is required for some IP Address Validation methods, so this needs to be something more general than "domain name".

Author: [Updated](https://github.com/ryancdickson/staging/pull/8/commits/8e5189533480cd185e17670f806c3d79c0753da0) bullets 7 and 8 to include consideration for IP addresses.
